Det
it's the reason Nicolas Cage has made so
many great choices in recent years and
presumably it's the fuel he uses to
power performances like this one from
his recent movie the trust he delivered
that line like a child on PCP opening
birthday presents which he clearly hopes
are full of more PCP American households
collectively owe over twelve trillion
dollars in debt and right now 436
billion of that debt is seriously
delinquent meaning it's 90 or more days
past jus and it is not good when
anything is that late if your baby were
three months overdue you'll effectively
just be giving birth to a floppy toddler
look clearly if you have debts you
should pay them if you can
but many people can find themselves in
debts for no direct fault of their own
take Bob wine cough a few years ago he
was in intensive care over breathing
trouble and after four days of treatment
the hospital told his wife that their
insurance was not going to cover the
costs she said the bill is up to eighty
thousand dollars already and she said
mrs. wine cough I hope you realize that
you're responsible for this bill I was
just hysterical
I thought what am I gonna do I've worked
my whole life is this how my life is
gonna end that's terrible because some
debts are completely unavoidable this
isn't someone spending 80 thousand
dollars on this Versace coat that looks
like a banana a Rorschach test
this is someone spending 80 thousand
dollars to breathe but the fact that so
many people have money trouble is not
really surprising what may surprise you
is the extent to which seriously
delinquent debts have now given birth to
an entire debt buying industry when most
consumers get a call and say I'm calling
in your Bank of America debt you assume
that it's someone a bay
America but what happens is Bank
America's sold off that debt for pennies
on the dollar years ago and it's been
bought and sold and bought and sold
bought and sold most of the big banks do
it and not just banks by payday loans
book club membership Jim fees auto loans
every year billions of dollars of this
debt is sold off cheap it's true debt
buying companies like these that you've
probably never heard of have amassed a
huge amount of Americans debt in fact
the largest encore Capital Group which
has these subsidiaries tell investors
that one in five consumers either owes
them money now or has owed them money in
the past which is incredible because
that means statistically one member of
Evanescence owes or has owed on corn
money and I think we all know who that
would be it would be guitarist and
backing vocalist Troy McLawhorn but as
you will see almost every step of how
this industry is allowed to operate is
problematic and let's start at the very
beginning let's say you have a thousand
dollar credit card debt that you can't
pay at a certain point your bank might
write off the full thousand dollars on
its taxes and then to make just a little
extra money sell it off to a debt buyer
for a tiny fraction of the cost maybe
$50 and that debt buyer can then come
after you for the full original amount
and if it can't collect potentially it
can then we sell that debt for a
fraction of what it paid to someone else
who can still come after you for the
original amount or sell it for a
fraction of what it paid and so on and
so on and so on now you might think the
information changing hands would include
a lot of verifiable information but you
would be wrong it's I think helpful I
understand that when I talk about debt
that's being bought and sold here we're
really just talking about an Excel
spreadsheet the spreadsheet will have
debtors name social security number
address balance date that the account
was opened maybe one or two other fields
but that's basically about it that's
right the information about your debt
may be solved in an Excel spreadsheet
which is troubling for two reasons first
nothing good happens in Excel
most of us go into a cold sweat if we
just open it by accident let me go back
in time and fix this and second in many
states there is little obligation on the
part of the debt seller to provide
additional documentation many leaked
contracts have explicitly stated that
debts are being sold as is and with all
faults which are weird terms to see in a
major business transaction they'd even
be troubling in the context of an
OkCupid profile as is with all thoughts
sometimes I masturbate to the Little
Mermaid hey it's the fish half that does
it for me now as for debt buyers they
aren't always scrupulous about checking
their information before collecting
which is why it is not surprising to see
incidents like this I opened the door
and a envelope was thrown at me and the
guy said you've been served and left
supposedly it was a debt that I owed it
was right under five thousand dollars
what it was with a company I never had a
card with it's humiliating it's
intimidating it it provokes a lot of
anxiety humiliating intimidating and
provokes anxiety and to be honest I've
had a similar experience but at least
afterwards I got to brag that I finally
lost my virginity it was some years
after that it's not just it's not just
these suits for a debt you don't
recognize buyers can end up harassing
you over debt that is past the statute
of limitations or that you've discharged
through bankruptcy or that you've paid
you may have seen stories like this on
local news because it's got a fun name
is called zombie debt that's debt that
you thought was dead but starts to take
on a whole new life much like a zombie
buried old debt coming back to life it's
called zombie debt we're not talking
about the kind of zombies that terrorize
humans each week on The Walking Dead old
death thought to be settled and buried
coming out of the grave if not to eat
your brain and certainly to give you a
headache
zombies are fun but the comparison is
actually quite apt because just like on
The Walking Dead zombie debt comes back
from the grave is incredibly hard to
deal with and seems to
disproportionately impact minorities so
so once once a company has bought your
debt whether the information is accurate
or not they are going to try to collect
on it and they can either do that
themselves or assign it to a collection
agency and while many collectors work
within the bounds of the law some behave
like this is not just horrifying it's
stupid how are you gonna put handcuffs
on a dog
they don't have wrists the cuffs are
just gonna slip straight off they're
cocky pause your plan is silly
and some debt collectors won't just stop
at calling you listen to an employee of
an upstate New York debt buyer explain
one of his tactics to a hidden camera
which is pretty nasty though is that
I'll find out where somebody works and
then I'll find out who the owner their
company is find out their number and
call them at home that's my favorite
thing to do that's your favorite thing
that is the weirdest favorite thing I've
ever heard and I am including whiskers
on kittens and ground paper packages
tied up with string that's a parcel bomb
she's describing a parcel bomb also
what's wrong with the rest of the kitten
you creep
now tactics like the ones that man
described are illegal but debt buyers
have been caught operating in flagrant
disregard for the law just look at
william scott and associates
federal prosecutors allege in a criminal
trial that will start next month that
they lied to debtors telling them they
were part of a government
force set up to investigate fraud and
using this letterhead featuring a clip
art image of scales and the logo of for
some reason the state's Department and
they even gave their employees aliases
like senior investigate or ace Rogers
and Joe Steele which sound like the
stage names of understudy Chippendales
sorry ace sorry Joe everyone's here
again tonight please put your shirts on
and leave and look the debt buying
industry will tell you that all these
abuses are outliers and that most debt
buyers work within the law but one way
they do that is that they sue people a
lot debt buyers are among the heaviest
individual users of our state court
systems in fact in some cities like
Newark st. Louis and Chicago and this is
true debt buyers have been found to file
more cases than any other type of
plaintiff and if you're wondering how
the lawyers representing debt buyers
possibly have time to review all those
cases they often don't when one New
Jersey collection firm was sued they
found that one attorney reviewed up to a
thousand cases a day reviewing one case
for just four seconds and look there are
definitely things that you can review in
under four seconds Lay's biscuits and
gravy flavored potato chips for instance
one two three awful
there you go or your mother's new
boyfriend one Mississippi two missile
not my real dad
but for judging whether you have enough
information to sue someone should really
take a little longer than that and it
turns out there is a strategy behind
filing so many lawsuits these companies
Bank on consumers ignoring the lawsuits
which means they're automatically
responsible for the debt they're dealing
with ninety to ninety-five percent of
these lawsuits going unanswered it's
true they go unanswered meaning people
don't turn up to their court dates and
the debt buyers win by default and the
phrase by default makes any situation
sound less legitimate hi I want you to
meet Carson he's my boyfriend by default
oh hi Carson I have a lot of questions
then and if they win in many states they
then have the power to garnish your
wages directly and given all of this it
is hardly surprising that the debt
collection industry of which debt buyers
are a major part can claim a dubious
honor we receive more complaints about
this industry than any other and last
year alone consumers filed over two
hundred and eighty thousand complaints
with federal authorities related to debt
collection Wow there aren't even two
hundred and eighty thousand complaints
on the Yelp page for Hitler's bunker
although though I don't like to add one
more why is there a Yelp page for this
one star one star for you now regulators
and prosecutors have taken some
successful actions against big players
in the debt industry and some states
have tightened their laws concerning
debt buyers but others like these have
all loosened regulation just look at
Arkansas where in 2013 representative
John vines proposed HB 2028 which he
claimed didn't do much at all what it
does is it defines the term credit card
which is apparently not been defined
throughout our many UCC provisions so
all this does is define credit card and
other terms that are germane to credit
card and credit card usage 2028 now I
know that sounds like the
most boring man describing the world's
most boring bill boringly but that's not
all it did because that bill actually
defines the legal term creditor to
include debt buyers and established a
presumption of correctness of the
information in favor of the debt buyer
that is a very friendly deal for them or
anyone like a bank that would want to
sell to them and it's worth noting that
representative vines his wife works for
a bank and I'd say he should have
disclosed that but there was really no
need to because the legislature was too
busy creepily joking about it and is
this considered a pro consumer bill or
neither not neutral is up for the
banking would it I don't I don't know
that it's going to have any effect on
the consumer it's more just clarify the
terms of usage I think presently used in
the industry represented Williams if
it's not good for banking I suggest it
representative representative vines not
go home tonight well I would suggest the
same way I want to make sure that he's
taking care of the bankers always tell
you what if I don't take care of the
bankers I'm gonna be taking care of
myself in the shower for the rest of the
week y'all know what I mean
five give me five I'll take another five
let's make it a twenty by the way that
that bill passed the Arkansas House 83
to zero but perhaps what's most
concerning about all of this is that in
some states there is a shockingly low
barrier of entry into this industry in
these states you can purchase debt with
no license and in these states you can
collect on debts with no license
essentially that means there are places
in this country where you need to fill
out less paperwork to start collecting
money from people's pockets than you do
to collect fish from a king lake now the
debt buyers trade group DBA
international claims the industry is
working to regulate itself in fact it's
developed a code of ethics it calls the
gold standard of the industry it
actually has an annual conference in Las
Vegas which does make sense as Vegas as
we know is the gold standard of shitty
places anyone can go to their conference
though I frankly wouldn't recommend it
it's pretty bleak and the reason I know
that is we sent people with a hidden
camera and the footage they brought back
was fascinating not fascinating like a
good book more fascinating like a rat
carrying a wedding ring across some
train tracks there's a story there and
it's a king sad one
but right from the start of the
conference there was a defensive tone
one seminar was actually titled debt
buyers are the good guys how to convince
the court although their argument for
that seemed shaky at best what we're
doing unbeknownst the most of the world
is we're helping the economy we're
securing monies from sources that
wouldn't ordinarily have been paying
them we're helping people who were
struggling with that to try to
restructure that and get their lives
back in order oh yeah they're really
helping people get their ducks in a row
but only in the window of a Chinese
restaurant since this good guy
conference also featured a free
shoeshine booth for a business promising
to liquidate your bankrupt and deceased
debt which is exactly what it sounds
like because their business includes
collecting on a debt after the debtor
passes away and that is the sleaziest
way of making money
imaginable other than a petting zoo
attendant charging ten bucks extra to
let you get to second base with a goat
and whenever the Lord did come up
speakers could be surprisingly glib for
instance some debt buyers try to collect
on out of statute debt which is debt
that has grown so old you can no longer
be sued over it and that is something
that some states now require debt buyers
notify you about in letters that they
sent but watch the contempt with which
one speaker dismisses those warnings
who's gonna be nourished in these words
the unsophisticated consumer I don't
know do you think you think we're good
is it really gonna impact your
collection I'd be curious to know you
know but all those disclaimers you want
on the letter has it has it really
negatively impacted collections nobody
inside with it and I know it doesn't but
I have a proposed these plaintiffs these
lawsuits they already read the letter o
Q no not a good guy business model has
ever been based on the logic of don't
worry about people's legal rights I'm
pretty sure half these unsophisticated
morons can't read right guys right am i
right though guys look it is pretty
clear by now debt buying is a grimy
business and badly needs more oversight
because as it stands any idiot can get
into it and I can prove that to you
because I'm an idiot
and we started a debt buying company
[Applause]
back in April we spent $50 to
incorporate a debt acquisition company
online in Mississippi and incidentally
over the Internet is the best way to
experience Mississippi we called it we
called it central asset recovery
professionals or carp after the
bottom-feeding fish I became chairman of
the board and carp set up this very
bland website and dipped our toes into
the debt market and with little more to
go on than that website we were soon
offered a portfolio of nearly fifteen
million dollars of out of statute
medical debt from Texas and a cost of
less than half a cent on the dollar
which is less than 60 grand for that
amount carp would be sent to the
personal information including names
current addresses and Social Security
numbers of nearly 9,000 people so we
bought it which is absolutely terrifying
because it means if I wanted to I could
legally have carp take possession of
that list and have employees start
calling people turning their lives
upside down over medical debts they no
longer had to pay there would be
absolutely nothing wrong with that
except for the fact that absolutely
everything is wrong
with that and that is why we actually
decided to go another way
because we thought well instead of
collecting on the money
why not forgive it because on one hand
it's obviously the right thing to do but
much more importantly we'd be staging
the largest one-time giveaway in
television show history because as best
we can tell the most anyone has ever
given away on a TV show at one time to
date was this
[Applause]
that giveaway was worth nearly eight
million dollars but we bought nearly
twice that in medical debt so instead of
having the file sent to carp we had the
seller send it directly to a nonprofit
organization which specializes in
forgiving medical debt with no tax
consequences for the debtor and tonight
at my signal with the power vested in me
as chairman of the board of car they
will commence the debt forgiving process
so what do you say are you ready to make
television history the 9,000 people
whose medical debt we bought the larger
issue is we need much clearer rules and
tougher oversight to protect consumers
from potentially predatory companies
like the one that we set up but in the
mean time it seems the least we can do
with this debts that I cannot Qing
believe we are allowed to own is to give
it away so are you ready to do this give
away fifteen million dollars
[Applause]
you